---
layout: post
title:  "Importance of understanding and breaking down your data flow"
date: 2016-07-01 21:06:26 +0800
categories: data-flow
---
This will be a fairly short post about my feelings about data flow. If you've worked along side me or asked me a question, you know I sound like a broken record about this. Having worked and studied alongside others learning to program, when asked a question about code, the answer I give most frequently is "Let's look at the data flow".

Okay it's not really an answer, but it gives a good starting point for them and myself when trying to figure out a solution or debugging.

Personally for myself I emphasize this because it helps me understand my current objective and even helps me remember specific syntax. Also, understanding the flow is a transferable skill whether you're learning Angular, React, Backb- ... Vue, or writing server side authentication or database schemas or almost anything else. Because if we think about it, the applications that we're making, we're creating data flow from point A to point B.

The way front-end frameworks (Angular) and libraries (React) pass data from one end to another are usually different from each other. And in my opinion, sitting down and trying to memorize all the different syntax to show you know a framework or library is not as useful or impressive as knowing what you want, breaking it down, and looking up documentation and/or examples to apply it.

Also, understanding the data flow makes memorizing syntax SO much easier. You begin to understand what each part does and its limitations.

So next time you're writing in a framework or library you're unfamiliar with, understand the flow you need, break down the flow, look up documentation and examples, understand what the syntax does, implement it, debug, and then move on. Personally for myself I absorb more information, and am able to move onto the next part more quickly than just conjuring and copying code from Stack overflow. 
