---
layout: post
title:  "What is scope?"
date: 2016-06-22 21:06:26 +0800
categories: learning, scope, bad examples, terrible examples
---
# So what is scope?

A scope is a section in your program where a name binding is valid. Basically, this means that wherever you declare a variable, you'll be able to use it. If i declare:
```javascript
var x = 20
```
then x is assigned to 20. And I can use that x variable anywhere in that scope and it will be equal to 20.

Simple. Bloody simple. So simple that I'm embarrassed at how long it took me to write up to this point. Now, where can I NOT use it?

Javascript has rules for scopes that we need to keep in mind:
  1. New scopes are created every time we create a new function.
  2. New scopes can be created inside of other scopes. This essentially means that functions can be created inside of functions.
  3. An inner scope has access to bindings that were declared in the outer scope. However the outer scope does NOT have access to the bindings declared in its inner scopes.

### 1. New scopes are created every time we create a new function

Don't over think it. Just: every time a function is made, inside those curly braces is a new scope. A scope that is unique to itself.

Let's make a function called animals with a variable x that's assigned to 'rabbit'. And then another function called frisbee, that console logs x. And then we'll invoke frisbee.

```javascript
function animals(){
  //this is the scope of the animals function

  var x = 'rabbit';
}

function frisbee(){
  //this is the scope of the frisbee function

  console.log(x)
}

frisbee();
```
Now, if you're like me when I was learning you're probably thinking, "This is obviously going to console log 'rabbit'. I'm ready to move on.". Try it out here on [repl.it][https://repl.it/J3s6].

So it comes out as <span class="red">Reference Error: x is not defined</span>. Again, looking at rule 1. The animals function makes a new scope. Whatever variables we declare in there, can only be used in that scope. So the frisbee function has no access to the variable that is assigned to 'rabbit'.

Since each have their own scope, declaring variable x in frisbee has no affect on the variable x in animals!

```javascript
function animals(){
  //this is the scope of the animals function

  var x = 'rabbit';
  console.log('animals scope:',x);
}

function frisbee(){
  //this is the scope of the frisbee function

  var x = 'flick hucks';
  console.log('frisbee scope:',x);
}
animals();
frisbee();
```
Try this out on [repl.it][https://repl.it/J3sq] again.

### 2. New scopes can be created inside of other scopes

A scope can be inside another scope. And if we remember from rule 1, scopes are created every time we create a new function. So let's create a scope within a scope:

```javascript
function animals(){
  //this is the scope of the animals function

  function frisbee(){
    //this is the scope of the frisbee function
    var x = 'flick hucks'
  }

  console.log('animals scope:',x);
}

animals();
```

Here's a [repl.it][https://repl.it/J3tK] example of it.  However we get the <span class="red">Reference Error: x is not defined</span> again. This makes sense when we look at rule 3:

### 3. An inner scope has access to bindings that were declared in the outer scope. However the outer scope does NOT have access to the bindings declared in its inner scopes.

A way to think about this is like a 2 way mirror. The inside scope (the inner function we made inside the outer function) is able to see all the variables in the outer scope. However the outer scope cannot see what's inside the inner scope. So when the outer scope tries to find a variable that's declared in the inner scope, we get another <span class="red">Reference Error: variable is not defined</span>.

Here is another [repl.it][https://repl.it/J44l] example. As we can see in the repl.it, the inner scope has access to variables in the outer function, but not vice versa.



Scopes can be tricky, especially once "Closures" get involved. But understanding scope becomes second nature after some practice and looking at code.

## Exercises:

Here are some exercises to help you learn more about scope: See if you can understand figure out the FINAL value of 'result'. The answers will be at the bottom of the post.

#### Question 1.
```javascript
//outer scope
var x = 30;

function get (x) { return x; }
function set (value) { x = value; }

set(10);
var result = get(20);

```

#### Question 2.

```javascript
//outer scope
var x = 30;

function get () { return x; }
function set (value) { x = value; }

set(10);
var result = get(20);
```

#### Question 3.
```javascript
//outer scope
var x = 10;

function outer () {
  //inner scope
  x = 20;
  function inner () {
    inner inner scope
    var x = x + 20;
    return x;
  }
  inner();
}

outer();

var result = x;
```

##### Answers
1. 20
2. 10
3. 20
